\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c
@c $Id: setl-imp.texi,v 1.23 2022/04/23 16:30:34 setlorg Exp $
@c
@c Free software (c) dB - see file COPYING for license (GPL).
@c
@setfilename setl-imp.info
@settitle GNU SETL Implementation Notes
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent none
@c
@c %**end of header

@include version-setl-imp.texi
@include include.texi


@ifinfo
@dircategory High-level programming
@direntry
* SETL implementation:  (setl-imp).    GNU SETL Implementation Notes.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU SETL Implementation Notes
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GNU SETL Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author by dB
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top GNU SETL Implementation Notes

@ifinfo
This info file discusses internals of the GNU SETL implementation.

SETL is of course the world's most wonderful programming language.
GNU SETL implements it along with some proposed extensions.

This file is designed to be viewed with @w{@code{info setl-imp}}.

GNU SETL normally comes with HTML and PDF versions too, and current
documents should always be at @uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc/}.
@end ifinfo

@c Placeholder menu:
@menu
* Overview::      Types, the VM, etc.
* Index::         Subject index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Overview
@unnumbered The Implementation of GNU SETL
@cindex Implementation of GNU SETL

@emph{*** To be written.}

Meanwhile, the GNU SETL sources themselves, and the comments they
contain, are the implementation guide.


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c setl-imp.texi ends here
