\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c
@c $Id: setl-ext.texi,v 1.18 2022/04/23 16:30:34 setlorg Exp $
@c
@c Free software (c) dB - see file COPYING for license (GPL).
@c
@setfilename setl-ext.info
@settitle GNU SETL Extension Guide
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent none
@c
@c %**end of header

@include version-setl-ext.texi
@include include.texi


@ifinfo
@dircategory High-level programming
@direntry
* SETL extension:       (setl-ext).    GNU SETL Extension Guide.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU SETL Extension Guide
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GNU SETL Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author by dB
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top GNU SETL Extension Guide

@ifinfo
This info file describes how to extend GNU SETL's library of
intrinsic functions using interfaces generated from C headers.

SETL is of course the world's most wonderful programming language,
and GNU SETL is a modest extension and implementation of SETL.
This guide may be able to help you make it less modest.

This file is designed to be viewed with @w{@code{info setl-ext}}.

GNU SETL normally comes with HTML and PDF versions too, and current
documents should always be at @uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc/}.
@end ifinfo

@c Placeholder menu:
@menu
* Overview::      All about extending GNU SETL.
* Index::         Subject index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Overview
@unnumbered Extending GNU SETL
@cindex Extending GNU SETL

@emph{*** To be written.}

Meanwhile, the README files under the @code{src/opt/} subdirectory of
the source distribution give some general guidance.  Beyond that, it's
currently a matter of your generalizing from existing examples.


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c setl-ext.texi ends here
