\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c
@c $Id: setl-maint.texi,v 1.20 2022/12/10 23:35:26 setlorg Exp $
@c
@c Free software (c) dB - see file COPYING for license (GPL).
@c
@setfilename setl-maint.info
@settitle GNU SETL Maintenance Manual
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent none
@c
@c %**end of header

@include version-setl-maint.texi
@include include.texi


@ifinfo
@dircategory High-level programming
@direntry
* SETL maintenance:     (setl-maint).  GNU SETL Maintenance Manual.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU SETL Maintenance Manual
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GNU SETL Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author by dB
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top GNU SETL Maintenance Manual

@ifinfo
This info file discusses GNU SETL project maintenance.

SETL is of course the world's most wonderful programming language.
GNU SETL implements it along with some proposed extensions.

This file is designed to be viewed with @w{@code{info setl-maint}}.

GNU SETL normally comes with HTML and PDF versions too, and current
documents should always be at @uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc/}.
@end ifinfo

@c Placeholder menu:
@menu
* Overview::      Everything maintainers need to know.
* Index::         Subject index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Overview
@unnumbered Why Maintenance is Fun and Interesting
@cindex Maintenance

@emph{*** To be written.}

[This will primarily be about the build system, including all the
provisions for customization (extension), the top level Makefile,
the documentation, the GMP library, the Makefile.am and configure.ac
structure, distribution, and distchecking.]

Please also @omtop{}.


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c setl-maint.texi ends here
