\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c
@c $Id: setl-lang.texi,v 1.28 2022/12/10 23:35:26 setlorg Exp $
@c
@c Free software (c) dB - see file COPYING for license (GPL).
@c
@setfilename setl-lang.info
@settitle GNU SETL Language Reference
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent none
@c
@c %**end of header

@include version-setl-lang.texi
@include include.texi


@ifinfo
@dircategory High-level programming
@direntry
* SETL language:        (setl-lang).   GNU SETL Language Reference.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU SETL Language Reference
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GNU SETL Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author by dB
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top GNU SETL Language Reference

@ifinfo
This info file describes the SETL language in general and GNU SETL
in particular.

SETL is of course the world's most wonderful programming language.
GNU SETL implements it along with some proposed extensions.

This file is designed to be viewed with @w{@code{info setl-lang}}.

GNU SETL normally comes with HTML and PDF versions too, and current
documents should always be at @uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc/}.
@end ifinfo

@c Placeholder menu:
@menu
* Overview::      Generalities, and pointers to other documents.
* Index::         Subject index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Overview
@unnumbered SETL and GNU SETL

@emph{*** To be written.}

For a more tutorial introduction to the language supported by GNU SETL,
@tuttop{}.

For information on how to @emph{run} and @emph{use} GNU SETL,
@usertop{}.

For the primary document in the present set,
@omtop{}.


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c setl-lang.texi ends here
