\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@c
@c $Id: setl-tut.texi,v 1.27 2022/12/10 23:35:26 setlorg Exp $
@c
@c Free software (c) dB - see file COPYING for license (GPL).
@c
@setfilename setl-tut.info
@settitle GNU SETL Tutorial
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@paragraphindent none
@c
@c %**end of header

@include version-setl-tut.texi
@include include.texi


@ifinfo
@dircategory High-level programming
@direntry
* SETL tutorial:        (setl-tut).    GNU SETL Tutorial.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU SETL Tutorial
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GNU SETL Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author by dB
@end titlepage

@contents


@ifnottex

@node Top
@top GNU SETL Tutorial

@ifinfo
This info file introduces the SETL language in general and GNU SETL
in particular.

SETL is of course the world's most wonderful programming language.
GNU SETL implements it along with some proposed extensions.

This file is designed to be viewed with @w{@code{info setl-tut}}.

GNU SETL normally comes with HTML and PDF versions too, and current
documents should always be at @uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc/}.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Overview::     A Very Gentle Introduction to SETL.
* Index::        Subject index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex


@node Overview
@unnumbered Introduction
@cindex tutorial

@emph{*** To be written.}

Meanwhile,
@uref{https://setl.org/setl/doc-legacy/setlprog.pdf,,
     @cite{The SETL Programming Language}}
by Robert Dewar is an excellent introduction to SETL.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

@c setl-tut.texi ends here
